tiflash: add 6.2.0 upgrade guide (#8803)
pingcap/docs: tiflash-620-upgrade-guide.md

This document describes the functional changes in TiFlash modules you need to pay attention to when you upgrade TiFlash from earlier versions to v6.2.0, and recommended actions for you to take.

To learn the standard upgrade process, see the following documents:

- [Upgrade TiDB Using TiUP](/upgrade-tidb-using-tiup.md)
- [Upgrade TiDB in Kubernetes](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb-in-kubernetes/stable/upgrade-a-tidb-cluster)

> **Note:**
> 
> - It is not recommended that you upgrade TiFlash across major versions, for example, from v4.x.x to v6.x.x. Instead, you need to upgrade from v4.x.x to v5.x.x first, and then to v6.x.x.
>
> - v4.x.x is near the end of its life cycle. Please upgrade to v5.x.x or later as soon as possible. For more information, see [TiDB Release Support Policy](https://en.pingcap.com/tidb-release-support-policy/).
>
> - As a non-LTS version, v6.0.0 will not release subsequent bug-fix versions. Please use v6.1.0 and later LTS versions whenever possible.
>
> - To upgrade TiFlash from versions earlier than V5.3.0 to V5.3.0 or later, you should stop TiFlash and then upgrade it. The following steps help you upgrade TiFlash without interrupting other components:
> 

> >    - Stop the TiFlash instance: `tiup cluster stop <cluster-name> -R tiflash`
> >    - Upgrade the TiDB cluster without restarting it (only updating the files): `tiup cluster upgrade <cluster-name> <version> --offline`
> >    - Reload the TiDB cluster: `tiup cluster reload <cluster-name>`. After the reload, the TiFlash instance is started and you do not need to manually start it.

Author: ```suggestion
>     - Stop the TiFlash instance: `tiup cluster stop <cluster-name> -R tiflash`
>     - Upgrade the TiDB cluster without restarting it (only updating the files): `tiup cluster upgrade <cluster-name> <version> --offline`
>     - Reload the TiDB cluster: `tiup cluster reload <cluster-name>`. After the reload, the TiFlash instance is started and you do not need to manually start it.
```

### Dynamic pruning

If you do not enable [dynamic pruning mode](/partitioned-table.md#dynamic-pruning-mode) and will not use it in the future, you can skip this section.

- Newly installed TiDB v6.1.0: Dynamic pruning is enabled by default.

- TiDB v6.0.0 and earlier: Dynamic pruning is disabled by default. The setting of dynamic pruning after an upgrade inherits that of the previous version. That is, dynamic pruning will not be enabled (or disabled) automatically after an upgrade.

    After an upgrade, to enable dynamic pruning, set `tidb_partition_prune_mode` to `dynamic` and manually update GlobalStats of partitioned tables. For details, see [Dynamic pruning mode](/partitioned-table.md#dynamic-pruning-mode).

## From v5.x.x or v6.0.0 to v6.2.0

In TiDB v6.2.0, TiFlash upgrades its data storage format to the V3 version. Therefore, when you upgrade TiFlash from v5.x.x or v6.0.0 to v6.2.0, besides functional changes in [TiFlash Proxy](#tiflash-proxy) and [Dynamic pruning](#dynamic-pruning), you also need to pay attention to the functional change in PageStorage.

### PageStorage

> By default, TiFlash v6.2.0 uses PageStorage V3 version [`format_version = 4`](/tiflash/tiflash-configuration.md#configure-the-tiflashtoml-file). This version significantly reduces the peak write I/O traffic and relieves excessive CPU usage caused by TiFlash data GC in scenarios with high update traffic and high concurrency or heavy queries.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, TiFlash v6.2.0 uses PageStorage V3 version [`format_version = 4`](/tiflash/tiflash-configuration.md#configure-the-tiflashtoml-file). This new data format significantly reduces the peak write I/O traffic. In scenarios with high update traffic and high concurrency or heavy queries, it effectively relieves excessive CPU usage caused by TiFlash data GC.
```

> - With more data written to the existing TiFlash nodes after an upgrade to v6.2.0, earlier data will be gradually converted to the new format.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- After an upgrade to v6.2.0, as new data is written to the existing TiFlash nodes, earlier data will be gradually converted to the new format.
```

- However, earlier data cannot be completely converted to the new format during the upgrade, because the conversion consumes a certain amount of system overhead (services are not affected, but you still need to pay attention). After the upgrade, it is recommended that you run the [`Compact` command](/sql-statements/sql-statement-alter-table-compact.md) to convert the data to the new format. The steps are as follows:

    1. Run the following command for each table containing TiFlash replicas:

        ```sql

>         ALTER TABLE <table_name> compact tiflash replica;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        ALTER TABLE <table_name> COMPACT tiflash replica;
```

        ```

    2. Restart the TiFlash node.

You can check whether there are tables still using the old data format on Grafana: Tiflash summary > storage pool > Storage Pool Run Mode.

- Only V2: Number of tables using PageStorage V2 (including partitions)
- Only V3: Number of tables using PageStorage V3 (including partitions)
- Mix Mode: Number of tables with data format converted from PageStorage V2 to PageStorage V3 (including partitions)

**Workaround for downgrading TiFlash in testing or other special scenarios**

> You can forcibly scale in the target TiFlash node and then replicate data. For detailed steps, see [Scale in a TiFlash cluster](/scale-tidb-using-tiup.md#scale-in-a-tiflash-cluster).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can forcibly scale in the target TiFlash node and then replicate data from TiKV again. For detailed steps, see [Scale in a TiFlash cluster](/scale-tidb-using-tiup.md#scale-in-a-tiflash-cluster).
```

> ## From v6.1.0 to v6.2.0

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## From v6.1 to v6.2
```

---
title: TiFlash v6.2 Upgrade Guide
summary: Learn the precautions when you upgrade TiFlash to v6.2.
---

# TiFlash v6.2 Upgrade Guide

This document describes the functional changes in TiFlash modules you need to pay attention to when you upgrade TiFlash from earlier versions to v6.2, and recommended actions for you to take.

To learn the standard upgrade process, see the following documents:

- [Upgrade TiDB Using TiUP](/upgrade-tidb-using-tiup.md)
- [Upgrade TiDB in Kubernetes](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb-in-kubernetes/stable/upgrade-a-tidb-cluster)

> **Note:**
>
> - An experimental feature introduced in v6.2.0, [FastScan](/develop/dev-guide-use-fastscan.md) provides more efficient query performance at the cost of strong data consistency. Note that the form and usage of this feature might change in subsequent versions.
>

> > - It is not recommended that you upgrade TiFlash across major versions, for example, from v4.x to v6.x. Instead, you need to upgrade from v4.x to v5.x first, and then to v6.x.

Author: ```suggestion
> - It is not recommended that you upgrade TiDB that includes TiFlash across major versions, for example, from v4.x to v6.x. Instead, you need to upgrade from v4.x to v5.x first, and then to v6.x.
```

- After an upgrade to v6.2.0, as new data is written to the existing TiFlash nodes, earlier data will be gradually converted to the new format.
- However, earlier data cannot be completely converted to the new format during the upgrade, because the conversion consumes a certain amount of system overhead (services are not affected, but you still need to pay attention). After the upgrade, it is recommended that you run the [`Compact` command](/sql-statements/sql-statement-alter-table-compact.md) to convert the data to the new format. The steps are as follows:

    1. Run the following command for each table containing TiFlash replicas:

        ```sql
        ALTER TABLE <table_name> COMPACT tiflash replica;
        ```

    2. Restart the TiFlash node.

> You can check whether there are tables still using the old data format on Grafana: Tiflash summary > storage pool > Storage Pool Run Mode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can check whether tables still use the old data format on Grafana: **TiFlash-Summary** > **Storage Pool** > **Storage Pool Run Mode**.
```

TiFlash-Summary is used in https://docs.pingcap.com/zh/tidb/stable/monitor-tiflash
